8 The Bishop’s Gambit June 5th  am a politician. I decided that we had spent enough time discussing their distorted vision of my personal qualities, and asked to know more about the Dean. The Bursar explained that the Dean is paranoid that the Master and the Bursar are intriguing about this matter behind his back. Which is why they decided to discuss it with me while he’s away. They made two matters quite clear: first, that they do not go in for intrigue; second, that the only way I can become Master of Baillie is if they can dump the Dean. This could be a problem. The Dean is a lazy bugger. He only has to do four hours work a week, give one lecture and a couple of tutorials – and he has tenure for life. They say that he only has two interests: cricket and steam engines. He never has to read a new book or think a new thought, so being an Oxford don is the perfect job for him. Why would he ever move? The Master and the Bursar have concluded that only a bishopric would get him away from Baillie and they were wondering about the Diocese of Bury St Edmunds, which is up for grabs. It is a very appealing Diocese. It is one of the old ones, with a seat in the Lords. This, I know, would appeal greatly to the Dean. In my observation of him, his principal hobby is sucking up to the aristocracy. Unfortunately, I’m not sure if I can do anything about getting Bury St Edmunds for the Dean. It’s rather late in the day. Furthermore, as I explained to them, the Church is looking for a candidate to maintain the balance between those who believe in God and those who don’t. It comes as a surprise to many, including the Master and the Bursar, to learn that many people in the church do not believe in God, including most of the bishops. Bury St Edmunds is sewn up. It has been arranged by the Church that Canon Mike Stanford will get the job. In theory Hacker has to recommend the appointment. But the Church customarily puts up the candidate they want plus an impossible second candidate, to ensure that the PM has no real choice. Furthermore, the Dean has not done enough public service even to qualify for Bury St Edmunds. But this is a serious matter for my own future, especially as there are no other dioceses coming free in the near future.mmed up, ‘is simply a matter of status. Dressing up in cassocks and gaiters.’ide who should be appointed to the see.’ ‘Isn’t that a job for the First Lord of the Admiralty?’ ‘No, Annie,’ the PM does not yet know that he wants two more names, but he will realise it as soon as the idea has been put to him. After all, it is only right that the Prime Minister should be given the feeling that he is making a choice. Therefore, Peter is obliged to put up a second candidate. I encouraged him to find someone plausible but unacceptable. Peter was concerned. He had only till tomorrow morning to think of yet another candidate. I suggested the Dean of Baillie College. Peter felt he was too implausible even to be suggested, on the grounds that he is unbelievably vain and hopelessly incompetent. I explained to Peter that the PM doesn’t think it’s silly to appoint people who are vain and incompetent. Look at the Cabinet. Furthermore, as the Dean has just had some good publicity he must be a plausible second choice. This made Peter more concerned. This time he was worried at the danger that the Dean might therefore get the job. I was able to smooth ruffled feathers by telling him of the PM’s stated view that a devout Christian should be appointed. As the Dean is known to believe only in Islam, the MCC and steam engines, Peter felt relaxed about making him the second name on the list. I shall have to smooth more ruffled feathers when Hacker recommends the Dean for the bishopric. However, tomorrow is another day. [ Hacker’s diary continues – Ed. ] June 14th The morning newspapers were a triumph. I was given the full credit for it all on the news last night as well. I’m not quite sure why. I suppose it must have all been my doing, really. After all, it says so in the papers. I did stop the Foreign Office from stopping the Dean, which comes to the same thing. Still, it’s strange. One normally has such a battle in public life to get the proper credit for anything good one has achieved. Yet here the glory’s being handed to me on a plate, when my role in it was peripheral to say the least. Anyway, there’s no point in asking for corrections when the story has come out so thoroughly to my advantage. I suppose I should count my blessings. I had a final meeting first thing this morning, to discuss the vacant bishopric. Apparently the Palace is now waiting. When Humphrey and Bernard came in, though, I first asked why – in their opinion – the Foreign Office press office gave me the credit for the rescue. Humphrey took the view that they couldn’t take any credit themselves because of their protest. But by giving me the credit, it looks like a government achievement instead of a church achievement. I suppose that must be it! The first sentence of the Telegraph leader reinforces that view. We moved on to the question of the new Bishop of Bury St Edmunds. I was initially in favour of Stephen Soames. Peter likes him too. And although the Dean of Baillie did a pretty good job in Qumran he is said to be fairly eccentric. In fact, I’ve heard he’s barking mad. But when I asked for Humphrey’s opinion, his response really frightened me. ‘I’m sure Soames is the choice the Crown Commissioners are hoping you’ll make, Prime Minister.’ An ominous warning sign. Peter hasn’t been levelling with me. I asked Humphrey what the problem is with Soames. ‘I’ve heard it said that he’s an extremist.’ What, I wondered, is extremist the code word for. ‘You mean that he believes in God?’ I was groping wildly. Bernard tried to explain. ‘He’s very religious, Prime Minister.’ I was still groping. ‘That’s all right for a bishop, isn’t it?’ ‘Well … yes and no,’ said Humphrey carefully. ‘He tends to raise issues that governments often would prefer not to be raised. He is a trenchant critic of abortion, contraception for the under-sixteens, sex education, pornography, Sunday trading, easy divorce and bad language on television.’ Quite a catalogue. This is serious. I don’t want some loud-mouth, self-righteous cleric challenging the government on all these subjects. It wouldn’t be so bad if we had a policy about any of them. But they are all matters about which the government is trying to avoid having a policy. Our policy is not to have a policy. I went over this with Humphrey. ‘Quite,’ he replied. ‘He is against your “no policy” policy.’ Bernard, presumably in the interests of clarity, piped up. ‘He would demand that you ban abortion, Sunday trading, contraception for the under-sixteens, sex education …’ ‘Thank you, Bernard, I’ve got the gist,’ I said. Humphrey said he had more bad news about Soames. ‘He’s also against oppression and persecution in Africa.’ I saw no problem with that. ‘So are we.’ ‘Yes,’ he agreed. ‘But Soames is against it when practised by black governments as well as white ones.’ So he’s a racist! [ This curious leap in logic is explained by the fact that Hacker had been a Guardian reader when in opposition – Ed .] I really didn’t know what to do. Sympathetically, Humphrey murmured that I could still choose Soames if I wanted to. Obviously I didn’t want to – but how could I turn down another two names? So we looked again at the Dean of Baillie. I listed the arguments against him. ‘He’s not really up to it. He’s said to be lazy, vain, and totally uninterested in Christianity.’ ‘Yes,’ said Humphrey, ‘but he’s not against it! I think he’d make a thoroughly suitable British bishop – cricket, steam engines, and a complete ignorance of theology. Theology can seriously damage your faith.’ My problem was that he was basically unqualified. The submission said that he has never done a real church job. He’s spent his whole life in Oxford. On the other hand, he did very well in Qumran, and so his appointment might be a very popular choice with the voters. Then Humphrey dropped a bombshell. ‘There is a problem,’ he said. ‘I gather that he is thinking of telling the press that the Qumran visit wasn’t your idea. I gather he has a letter from the Bishop of Banbury dated some time before your involvement.’ This was dreadful news! It would be an incredible embarrassment. It would look as if I were trying to take the credit for something I didn’t do! I can just imagine the headlines. PRIME MINISTER TAKES CREDIT FOR DEAN’S MERCY MISSION. Or JIM DIDN’T FIX IT! So the question was, how could we stop the Dean from making this embarrassing revelation? It seemed, according to Humphrey’s information, that the Dean is peeved because he felt that he hasn’t been given enough recognition for his role in Qumran. Or the church hasn’t. Or something! On the face of it, there was an easy answer. I told Bernard to invite the Dean here for drinks this evening. It’ll be a very nice photo opportunity for the press, too. Humphrey, however, said that this would be improper: whilst I am considering two candidates for the vacancy in Bury St Edmunds I can hardly, in his view, invite just one of them here for drinks. I saw his point. But I had to do something to stop him blabbing to the press. Then Humphrey, thank God, had a brainwave. ‘If you had already given him the job, then it would be perfectly proper.’ And then, the more I thought about it, the more I began to feel that the Dean might be rather a good choice of bishop. After all, he is an enterprising chap. And, as I explained to Bernard, eccentricity can be a virtue: you just call it individualism. Bernard agreed wholeheartedly. ‘It’s one of those irregular verbs, isn’t it? “I have an independent mind, you are eccentric, he is round the twist?”’ We discussed it further, and agreed that we need people in the House of Lords who understand the Arab world. And cricket. And st, I made the Rev. Christopher Smythe, Dean of Baillie College, Oxford, my choice. I told Bernard to convey my recommendation to the Palace, fast! I wanted the appointment announced by lunchtime, the Dean informed at once, and I wanted him round here for drinks, with a photographer, by six o’clock this evening. And that’s what happened. The crisis was averted. We have a new Bishop of Bury St Edmunds, the nurse was freed from Qumran, and I got the credit all round. Humphrey was delighted too. He told me that the appointment of the Dean was an act of wisdom. In fact, he was so pleased that I began to wonder why. I suddenly remembered that Baillie was Humphrey’s old college. Perhaps that was why he knew so much about the Dean and why he was so pleased. So I asked him if this was another case of jobs for the boys. He denied it indignantly. ‘On the contrary, Prime Minister. I hardly know him. In fact, I know he dislikes me. You can ask him this evening, if you like. I don’t like him much either.’ ‘So you have nothing to gain from this appointment?’ ‘How could I have?’ he asked. I couldn’t see how. But it all seemed a little coincidental. So while we were having our photos taken by the press in front of the fireplace in the White Sitting Room, I asked the Dean if he liked Humphrey Appleby. ‘Can’t stand him, quite frankly,’ the Dean whispered to me. ‘I think he’s smug.’ So Humphrey was telling the truth. I am really very grateful to him, for giving me helpful, impartial advice in the best traditions of the Civil Service.